---
author: "Brandon LeBeau" 
author2: "Michael R. Harwell" 
author3: "Debra Monson"
author4: "Danielle Dupuis" 
author5: "Amanuel Medhanie" 
author6: "Thomas R. Post"
Status: Published
comments: false
date: 2012-03-19
slug: mnmap-3
title: "Student and High-School Characteristics related to completing a science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) major in college"
kind: article
tags:
  - Mathematics Curriculum
  - Achievement
  - STEM
citation: <em>Research in Science & Technological Education</em>, <b>30:1</b>, 17 - 28
type: publications
---

**Background:** The importance of increasing the number of US college students
completing degrees in science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM)
has prompted calls for research to provide a better understanding of factors
related to student participation in these majors, including the impact of a stu-
dent’s high-school mathematics curriculum.

**Purpose:** This study examines the relationship between various student and
high-school characteristics and completion of a STEM major in college. Of spe-
cific interest is the influence of a student’s high-school mathematics curriculum
on the completion of a STEM major in college.

**Sample:** The sample consisted of approximately 3500 students from 229 high
schools. Students were predominantly Caucasian (80%), with slightly more
males than females (52% vs 48%).

**Design and method:** A quasi-experimental design with archival data was used
for students who enrolled in, and graduated from, a post-secondary institution in
the upper Midwest. To be included in the sample, students needed to have com-
pleted at least three years of high-school mathematics. A generalized linear
mixed model was used with students nested within high schools. The data were
cross-sectional.

**Results:** High-school predictors were not found to have a significant impact on
the completion of a STEM major. Significant student-level predictors included
ACT mathematics score, gender and high-school mathematics GPA.

**Conclusions:** The results provide evidence that on average students are equally
prepared for the rigorous mathematics coursework regardless of the high-school
mathematics curriculum they completed.
